recognized very happily. They had no trouble at
all. Everybody got along fine. Of course, they
were very high types, really. They were top
people.
In the working of, let's say, drawings and record
keepings and so forth, whose responsibilities
were those after the plant closed down? After the
plant closed down? Well, when the plant was built
originally, Hercules had a contract. that says
that if indeed the plant is ever put up for sale,
then Hercules would not bid on the plant, but they
would have the opportunity to match the highest
bidder. So the upshot was, of course, that the
plant did revert to Hercules after it was shut
down. Hearst bought a tremendous amount of stuff
to Morgantown, wouldn't he? He came to Morgantown
as resource director after they shut it down.
bought an awful lot of the operating uh i might some
of them may still be out there i don't know with
charts and stuff like that but the the things that
were really it was really too bad was that all these
uh full-scale drawings of all the equipment was uh
was thrown out how was it thrown out well this
fellow they got this felt we had this
administrative assistant like i say
periodically in the government they used to say
how many how many cubic feet of file space you got,
and then you tell them, they say, get rid of 30% of
it. So that was how you got rid of some of it. You
didn't say nothing to nobody. Like I say, it was a
body blow, but they were gone. And those were the
only existing copies of it? I don't know what they
had at Louisiana, very frankly. I just don't know.
But see, at that time, the plant was shut down. We
found out a couple of things. One, it was possible
to duplicate German equipment in this country. We
could build equipment. But the thing that you had
to remember was that we were about at the, it was
almost impossible to scale that stuff up due to the
wall thickness. Due to the what? Wall thickness of
the vessels because of the tremendously high
pressure. See, those vessels were designed for
11,000 pound pressure. And the only way that we
could make the converters, they were actually,
there was only one outfit in the country that could
make them. And that was messed up here in
Pittsburgh. And those converter bodies were
actually forged on a mandrel. You can't roll
anything that small and that thick. And of course,
that was one of the big things against those kind of
pressures. See, we don't use those kind of
pressures anymore. We got away from them. And one
of the reasons we got away from them was that you
just plain can't scale up those kind of vessels.
So, in other words, to expand the plant, to produce
enough oil to be realistic would be too expensive?
Is that what you're saying? Well, in the first
place, yes, obviously, because we were off by a
factor of five of what it would cost to make
gasoline from oil, I would guess. And I thought
that was optimistic.
The process, the hydrogenation process, of
course, at the time operated at 700 atmospheres.
and that required a very special type of
equipment. And like I say, it's almost impossible
to scale up those type of vessels. And then see, we
had water and oil washes in the gas recycle system,
which again recycled 700 atmospheres. So we had a
lot of real high-pressure vessels in that plant,
and it was a relatively small plant. The plant was
only designed for about four ton of coal an hour,
and we never got up to that.
Louisiana, Missouri plants produce monthly,
or—? Well, that's hard to answer, but the
aggregate—we produced over a million barrels of
gasoline by coal hydrogenation. And we made one
three-month run.
And the product was shipped to Aberdeen Proving
Ground? Oh, shipped everywhere. I'll never
forget, Dr. Storch and I went to one of the Army
posts You found out they were using the damn stuff
in garbage trucks, and that hurt his pride.
It was also used to fuel the Burlington Railroad.
We ran a, yeah, that's right, on dedication, we did
run a train up to Louisiana, from St. Louis to
Louisiana, Missouri, and back. But we cheated a
little bit on that. And that was that we, we, we, we,
uh, that gasoline was made by hydrogenating the
coal We were in a hurry for it. They had scheduled
this dedication before we were ready, and Hurst
had no choice. The only way he could make it was to
run the vapor phase on our mineral, run the liquid
phase on coal tar. And later on we got into it. See,
it was a dual plan. The first thing you did, you
hydrogenated the coal to make what we called a
metal oil. And then you went over into another
plant and hydrogenated the metal oil into
gasoline. Metal oil? Middle oil. Middle oil.
Middle oil. Just a term. I see. But both of these
plants operated—both of them were designed to
operate at 700 atmospheres. 10,500 pounds per
hour? 10,500
pounds. Yeah. Hmm. Did you have any problem with
valves and this sort of thing? Oh, yeah. Yeah. We
had—well, yeah, we had a lot of problems with
valves because of the letdown and the The way we got
away from that pretty much was we went to silicon
carbide on everything. I mean, not silicon
carbide, titanium carbide. No, we'll get it right
out. Tungsten titanium carbide. But like I say, it
was pretty obvious to me as a mechanical engineer
that a plant that operated those kinds of
pressures even well—of course, the same thing was
true of ammonia. It just wasn't practical. See, we
couldn't scale up the ammonia plant. We had five
ammonia plants for about the best we ever got was
200 tons a day, and now they make 1,500 tons with one
plant.
With the same process? Well, it's the same
process, except it operates at much lower
pressure. Instead of operating at 15,000 pounds,
the ammonia plants now run at 3,200.
So... The answer is that no process that has to go to
those kind of pressures, to me at least, isn't
practical. I'm not all sure they're practical,
lower pressures. How many other Germans were
involved besides these seven? That's all I know
of. I see. And they weren't treated badly? They
weren't... Oh, no, they were accepted just the
same. I mean, they were technical people. I mean,
they, you know, the wives went back and forth and
had coffee and We went down to St. Louis together
and maybe see an operator. So they were very
rapidly, they just became a part of the community.
And like I say, one thing I've noticed, and I've
spent a lot of time in Europe, and I've noticed that
you will get people who will come together or get
together on an intelligence level more than they
will actually on a national level. And, of course,
I say these people were top people. They were
intelligent people, and they just put it right in.
How were these people chosen? Did Dr. Hurst choose
them? Well, Hurst and Schroeder and a bunch of them
went over. That's why I was still in the service.
And I guess they went over and talked to these
people. They didn't put a gun on anybody, he said,
you know, the ones that wanted to come, great.
Luckily, they were able to get to best.
Where does Mr. Sternberg fit into this? I know he
was with the Bureau of Mines. Sternberg, let's
see, I think he had charge of the lab back there, as I
remember. No, no, no, no, no, no, no. He was on the,
no, Sternberg was on the, he was on the technical
reels and stuff like that. type of thing. So he was
the one who was translating the German documents?
Yeah, I think I'm pretty sure he was, yeah. Yeah, I
mixed him up. Tarpley had charge of the lab.
Are we okay? Yeah. But see, my job at first was,
well, one of the things we had to do, we had to
redesign the plant as far as high-pressure
recycle compressors go. And I handled that.
But we had already built up a group of people who
could handle this high-pressure equipment. They
were holdovers from the ammonia plant. So really,
the only problems that they had were pretty much
over in the hydrogenation area, as far as the
hydrogenation goes. The hydrogen manufacturing
and compression and cleanup just ran pretty
smoothly. And like I say, we had plenty of spare
equipment. See, what we did, we had one process
hyper, and then we had another hyper just sitting
there, ready to go. And then we had a third one that
we used for inert gas. But we didn't need that much
inert gas. Then later on, we bought another small
compressor for inert gas, much lower flow, much
lower power. Most of the time we got by on one hyper.
Let me ask you, did you ever have an opportunity to
talk to some of these German scientists and
inquire how they felt about their synthetic
program during the war and what problems they had?
Oh, yeah, yeah, that's what we used to do. We used to
sit around in the evening and maybe have a drink or
two. In fact, one of the things that they—I think it
was, what was it, the name? They couldn't get
olives. They couldn't get what? They couldn't get
olives in Germany. But they were all martini
drinkers. All these Germans were. And they
introduced us to another type of—oh, I guess that
was the first time I ever saw onions in martinis.
They had learned that in Germany, because they
didn't have olives. And lemons were kind of hard to
come by, too. They started the cocktail onion
thing. But anyway, no, I can say we sat around and
talked. Actually, the German synthetic fuel
effort, at the most, was never more than about
400,000 barrels a day. Roughly, they got half by
synthetics and half from crude. So they ran the war
machine, you would say, about 50 percent? Well,
toward the end, of course, it was less, because
they had a lot of planes and stuff sitting on the
ground.
had a pretty high priority for the bombers, too. Of
course. Did they imply that politics that, uh,
hampered or favored their production during the
war? Um, yes, yes. Of course, it was very, as you
know, it was very political, and you had, well,
actually, you had a maniac running the goddamn
country. So what could you expect? So, no, he, he
did everything. He ran everything from the seat of
his britches. The upshot was that even people like
Speer, who had charge of everything under Hitler,
was still frequently overruled by Hitler on
things. The hierarchy over there was Speer, I
guess, who had everything, and then a fellow named
Peer, who had all synthetics, and then Donath, who
had coal hydrogenation. He was head of the coal
hydrogenation program. He was the head guy we
brought over. Does the name Rowland sound
familiar? Who?
R-O-E-L-A-N-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-A-T-H-
H-L-E-N. Rowland? No. As a German scientist who
was in charge, perhaps, under Donoff? No, he
wasn't. We had nobody by that name, I reckon. I
couldn't remember. Uh-huh. No. No.
Now, when time comes for the plant to be shut down,
were you still around then? Yeah, I was here. I had
moved back here and started at the place at the
station out here, I'd move back here and start a
pressure gasification program. Because my
calculations show that we could make a tremendous
saving in horsepower by generating either the
hydrogen or the hydrogen plus CO and the elevated
pressures. And of course, a compressor curve is a
logarithmic curve. The pressure, I mean, the
power varies as the logarithm of the pressure, not
as the pressure. So that says that the low
pressures are where you use the most power. So I
started my program at 450 PSI, figuring at that
time I'd made an awful lot of the potential
savings, even if you went up, say, to 10,000
pounds.
And what was the reaction of the Bureau of Mines
when they discovered the decision is to close the
plant? Well, the fine damn thing was to shut that
thing off. Thanks.